docs: add release-note fragment for PR #2284 (#2439)
llm-d/llm-d-inference-scheduler: release-notes.d/unreleased/2284.md

---
pr: 2284
url: https://github.com/llm-d/llm-d-router/pull/2284
author: satyamg1620
date: 2026-08-18
---

> Flow control queue wait can now be budgeted separately for an empty pool. `noEndpointRequestTTL` bounds how long a request waits while the candidate pool has no endpoints, leaving `defaultRequestTTL` to bound waiting against a saturated pool. Size it above expected pod startup: a request shed while the pool is still coming up would have been servable moments later. An explicit `0s` waits indefinitely for an endpoint. The budget in force is re-evaluated while a request is queued, so a pool that scales up moves its queued requests onto `defaultRequestTTL` with a fresh budget, though total queue wait stays bounded by the longer of the two budgets plus a short expiry-sweep margin, and a regime change does not extend that bound. Empty-pool expiry is reported as `EvictedNoEndpoints` and returns 503. `noEndpointRequestTTL` follows `defaultRequestTTL` when unset, and both default to 60s when neither is set, so an existing `defaultRequestTTL` continues to govern both regimes until you split them, including an explicit `0s`, which disables eviction in both. At the defaults an empty-pool expiry lands at the first expiry sweep after the budget elapses (under a second later at the default sweep interval) and carries the `EvictedNoEndpoints` outcome label instead of `EvictedTTL`, so dashboards or alerts keyed on `EvictedTTL` for scale-from-zero need to account for the new label. The HTTP status and the `x-llm-d-request-dropped-reason` header are unchanged.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can now assign requests waiting for pods to start a separate, usually longer flow control timeout, while keeping the existing timeout for requests waiting on an already-running but saturated pool:
- Pool has no endpoints: `noEndpointRequestTTL` controls how long a request waits.
- Pool has endpoints but they're all busy: `defaultRequestTTL` controls how long it waits.
- An existing `defaultRequestTTL` continues to govern both regimes until you split them
```
